In this lesson we're going to look at
another
means of prematurely transferring control
in a while loop.
And this time we're gonna look at the
break statement which
will cause a loop to terminate when the
break statement is encountered.
First, let's look at the general form of
the break before we look at a specific
example.
So, we have our while loop with the
relational expression.
Then, we have a series of statements.
Then, most likely, we'll have a condition
which, if true, will
lead us to want to break out of the loop,
altogether.
So we'll display it like that.
And then more statements to execute,
perhaps, if this relational expression is
false.
So, again what happens is, is that the
loop executes
normally unless this if statement or the
relational expression of the
if statement returns true, and then the
break is executed and
control is transferred to the first
statement after the while loop.
We can put as a comment, break transfers
control to here, and that's unlike
the continue statement, which will send
the control back to the top of the loop.
Break takes you completely out of the
loop.
So, let's look at a more specific example.
[BLANK_AUDIO]
We'll call this program break.py.
What we're going to is, we're going
to Write the averaging program we wrote
earlier.
We're not going to worry about grade so
much this time.
We're just going to average some numbers.
So, I'll put a variable there, though, I
don't really need it this time.
We'll set a total up.
We'll set up an average.
And then we'll also set up a count to keep
track of how many numbers we're entering.
So, then, we'll say, while true.
What's going to happen now, is this loop
is going to run continuously, unless a
sentinel value is entered, in which case,
we will then use break to stop the loop.
So, let's take a look at how that's going
to work.
So, we prompt the user to enter a number.
We'll get it in using raw input and
convert it to float.
So, we can have floating point numbers if
we choose to.
Then, we're going to say, if number is
equal to negative 1, break.
Otherwise, add it to the total, and
increment the count by one.
And that'll take us back to the top of the
loop.
And then when we're finished, we compute
the
average, write about the count and then
print.
[BLANK_AUDIO].
And then print the average.
So, again what will happen is if then
number
we enter is negative one, then control
will transfer
from inside the loop to the first
statement after
the loop, which is where the average is
calculated.
So, let's exit and save, now let's give it
a try here.
[BLANK_AUDIO].
Woops, I didn't do that right.
Break.py, there we go.
We have a little syntax error, so let's go
back into the program.
Our syntax error is right here, I left
off this closing parenthesis for the whole
print function.
Very common to do when you're typing.
I'm looking at this as I'm typing this
parenthesis,
I'm seeing that parenthesis as the match
when, of
course, that's the match for this
parenthesis, so I
need a second closing parenthesis to fix
it up.
There we go.
Let's clear the screen, try it again.
That's much better.
Let's do some very easy calculations.
So, here I enter negative one.
Negative one triggers the break so we
break
out of the loop and we compute the
average.
Let's run it one more time with just some
random numbers.
That's gonna really mess our average up.
That's gonna mess it up even more.
And so, there's our average.
So, again, break can be used any time some
condition occurs that necessitates ending
the loop at that point.
I wouldn't recommend writing this program
I've used here.
I just used this style for demonstration
purposes.
You are better off writing this program
the way I did earlier in
the chapter, but I wanted to demonstrate
how break works with a familiar example.
With that, we're ready to leave these
topics of how to prematurely transfer
control
out of the loop and look at a very common
use of loops in programming.
And that's processing text files.
And we'll cover working with text files in
the next two lessons.